Add page for formatting customization (#8868)
ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website: swan-lake/development-tutorials/source-code-dependencies/customizing-formatting.md

Reviewer: Let's use "Customize formatting" instead of "Customization of formatting" for consistency with the rest.

---
title: Customization of formatting
description: The section on providing custom configurations to the formatter.
keywords: ballerina, programming language, formatting, custom configurations
permalink: /learn/customizing-formatting/
active: customizing-formatting
intro: This feature allows developers to customize the formatting of Ballerina projects. This is done with the use of a configuration file. This configuration file can be a local or a remote file, which allows for consistency in code style across projects and simplifies the process of enforcing formatting standards. This is introduced as an experimental feature in Ballerina 2201.9.0.
---

## Configuring

Users can provide custom formatting configurations with the use of a separate configuration file of the `toml` format. Users can provide an arbitrary name for the file.

> The formatting configuration file can be specified in two ways:

Reviewer 2: This says can be specified in two ways, but there are 4 bullet points given below which is confusing. So first list the two ways clearly and then mention additional points after another sentence etc.

> * `Ballerina.toml`: Define the path to a configuration file within the Ballerina.toml itself. The path can be absolute, relative to the package root, or a URL (HTTP/HTTPS). This path is specified under the `format` section in `Ballerina.toml` with the use of the `configPath` attribute. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `Ballerina.toml`: Define the path to a configuration file within the `Ballerina.toml` itself. The path can be absolute, relative to the package root, or a URL (HTTP/HTTPS). This path is specified under the `format` section in `Ballerina.toml` with the use of the `configPath` attribute. 
```

    ```
    [format]
    configPath = "Format.toml"
    ```

> * Format.bal: If no configuration path is specified in Ballerina.toml, the formatter will look for a file named `Format.toml` in the current package root directory.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `Format.bal`: If no configuration path is specified in `Ballerina.toml`, the formatter will look for a file named `Format.toml` in the current package root directory.
```

Reviewer 2: Check such missing backticks on file names all the places.

* If the `configPath` argument is not provided in the `Ballerina.toml` or the `Format.toml` file does not exist in the project root, default formatting options will be applied.
* If the format config path is an HTTP/HTTPS URL, a cache of the configuration file will be maintained inside the target directory. If the remote configuration file is modified, then make sure to delete the cached `Format.toml` file inside the `target/format/` directory.

> 

Reviewer 2: Why extra new lines, check and remove all

### Indent

#### indentSize

* Specifies the number of spaces for each level of indentation.
* Value: Integer (e.g., 2, 4)
* Default: 4

    ```ballerina
    function main() {
        if (condition) {
            io:println("Indented code");
        }
    }
    ```

#### continuationIndentSize

* Determines the indentation size for continuation lines.
* Value: Integer (e.g., 4, 8)
* Default: 8

    ```ballerina
    function longFunctionName(int param1, int param2, int param3,
            int param4, int param5) {
    }
    ```

### Wrapping

#### maxLineLength

* Maximum line length before code is wrapped.
* Value: Integer (e.g., 80, 120)
* Default: No line wrapping if maxLineLength not specified.

#### simpleBlocksInOneLine 

* Preserve single-line blocks in user code.
* Value: Boolean
* Default: false

    ```ballerina
    if x == 1 { return true; }
    while i < 5 { i += 1; }
    ```

#### simpleFunctionsInOneLine

* Preserve single-line methods on a single line.
* Value: Boolean
* Default: false

    ```ballerina
    function getName() returns string { return self.name; }
    ```

### Braces

#### classBraceStyle: 

* Placement of the opening brace of the class definition.

> * Values: NewLine, EndOfLine

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't we use backticks for NewLine, EndOfLine etc? @MaryamZi

Reviewer: Yeah, since these are fixed values, we should.

* Default: EndOfLine
    * NewLine
        ```ballerina
        class MyClass 
        {
            // class members
        }
        ```

    * EndOfLine
        ```ballerina
        class MyClass {
            // class members
        }
        ```

#### functionBraceStyle 

* Placement of the opening brace of the function definition.
* Values: NewLine, EndOfLine
* Default: EndOfLine
    * NewLine
        ```ballerina
        function foo()
        {
            // function members
        }
        ```

    * EndOfLine
        ```ballerina
        function foo(){
            // function members
        }
        ```

### Function Definition

#### parametersWrap

* Formatting of the function parameters when the maxLineLength is exceeded.
* Values: Wrap, NoWrap, ChopDown

> * Default: Wrap if maxLineLength specified, else NoWrap

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't we use backticks for maxLineLength, NoWrap etc? Check all the places.

* Default: Wrap if maxLineLength specified, else NoWrap
    * Wrap
        ```ballerina
        myMethod(param1, param2, param3, param4,
                param5, param6);
        ```

    * NoWrap
        ```ballerina
        myMethod(param1, param2, param3, param4, param5, param6);
        ```

    * ChopDown
        ```ballerina
        myMethod(param1, 
            param2,
            param3,
            param4,
            param5,
            param6);
        ```

#### alignMultilineArguments

* Align multiline arguments with the open brace.
* Values: Boolean
* Default: false

    ```ballerina
    myMethod(param1, param2, param3, param4
            param5, param6);
    ```

#### newLineAfterLeftParen

* Newline after the left parenthesis of the function declaration.
* Values: Boolean
* Default: false

    ```ballerina
    myMethod(
            param1, param2, param3, param4, param5, param6);
    ```

#### rightParenOnNewLine

* Right parenthesis of the function declaration on a newline.
* Values: Boolean
* Default: false

    ```ballerina
    myMethod(param1, param2, param3, 
            param4, param5, param6
    );
    ```

### If Statement

#### elseOnNewLine

> * else and else if keyword on the newline which follows after the } of the previous if or else if statement.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `else` and `else if` keywords on the newline, which follows after the `}` of the previous `if` or `else if` statement.
```

* Values: Boolean
* Default: false

    ```ballerina
    if (condition) {
        // if block
    } 
    else {
        // else block
    }
    ```

### Spacing

#### afterTypeCast

* Space after type casting.
* Values: Boolean
* Default: true

    ```ballerina
    int x = <int> someValue;
    ```

#### aroundRecordBraces

* Space after the opening brace and before the closing brace of a mapping constructor.
* Values: Boolean

> * Default: true

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Default: `true`
```

Reviewer 2: Check all places.

    ```ballerina
    Student x = { name: “Alex”, age: 15 };
    ```

#### alignConsecutiveDefinitions

* Align equals on consecutive definitions.
* Values: Boolean
* Default: false

    ```ballerina
    const A   = "a";
    const AB  = "ab";
    const ABC = "ab";
    ```

### Import

#### groupImport

* Group imports by, 
    * Imports from the same package.

>     * Imports from the ballerina/ and ballerinax/ organizations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * Imports from the `ballerina` and `ballerinax` organizations.
```

---
title: Customization of formatting
description: The section on providing custom configurations to the formatter.
keywords: ballerina, programming language, formatting, custom configurations
permalink: /learn/customizing-formatting/

> active: customizing-formatting

Reviewer: Can you update these also to be consistent with the rest of these pages, please?

Author: The `layout` section is missing here as per @sm1990, this is no longer required

> intro: This feature allows developers to customize the formatting of Ballerina projects. This is done with the use of a configuration file. This configuration file can be a local or a remote file, which allows for consistency in code style across projects and simplifies the process of enforcing formatting standards. This is introduced as an experimental feature in Ballerina 2201.9.0.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
intro: This feature allows developers to customize how a Ballerina project is formatted via a local or remote configuration file. This allows for consistency in code style across projects in an organization and simplifies the process of enforcing formatting standards. This is introduced as an experimental feature in Ballerina 2201.9.0.
```

---

> ## Configuring

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## The formatting configuration file
```

> Users can provide custom formatting configurations with the use of a separate configuration file of the `toml` format. Users can provide an arbitrary name for the file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Users can customize formatting configuration via a configuration file in the `toml` format.
```

The formatting configuration file can be specified in two ways:

> * `Ballerina.toml`: Define the path to a configuration file within the `Ballerina.toml` itself. The path can be absolute, relative to the package root, or a URL (HTTP/HTTPS). This path is specified under the `format` section in `Ballerina.toml` with the use of the `configPath` attribute.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `Ballerina.toml`: Define the path to the configuration file in the `Ballerina.toml` file. The path can be absolute, relative to the package root, or a URL (HTTP/HTTPS). This path has to be specified under the `format` header in the `Ballerina.toml` file as `configPath` .
```

>     ```
>     [format]
>     configPath = "Format.toml"
>     ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
    ```toml
    [format]
    configPath = "Format.toml"
    ```
````

May also make sense to have a more complete file, rather than just this bit.

> * `Format.toml`: If no configuration path is specified in `Ballerina.toml`, the formatter will look for a file named `Format.toml` in the current package root directory.

Reviewer: Shall we indent these?

Author: It doesn't seem to be possible to indent the one single level list in an .md file. (when indented it is considered as a code.)

> * `Format.toml`: If no configuration path is specified in `Ballerina.toml`, the formatter will look for a file named `Format.toml` in the current package root directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `Format.toml`: If no configuration path is specified in the `Ballerina.toml` file, the formatter will look for a file named `Format.toml` in the package's root directory.
```

> * `Format.toml`: If no configuration path is specified in `Ballerina.toml`, the formatter will look for a file named `Format.toml` in the current package root directory.

Reviewer: With configurables and the Config.toml file we look for the Config.toml file in the current working directory. While it's not the same, there are similarities here, so wonder if we should do that instead.

> If the `configPath` argument is not provided in the `Ballerina.toml` or the `Format.toml` file does not exist in the project root, default formatting options will be applied.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the `configPath` value is not provided in the `Ballerina.toml` file or the `Format.toml` file does not exist in the project root, default formatting options will be used.
```

> If the format `configPath` is an HTTP/HTTPS URL, a cache of the configuration file will be maintained inside the `target` directory. If the remote configuration file is modified, then make sure to delete the cached `Format.toml` file inside the `target/format/` directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the format `configPath` value is an HTTP/HTTPS URL, the configuration file will be cached in the `target` directory. If the remote configuration file is modified, then make sure to delete the cached `Format.toml` file inside the `target/format/` directory.
```

Did we discuss this user experience anywhere?

Author: We did have a discussion on this in the earlier stages of the design and decided that it is a responsibility of the user to remove the cached file if it is updated

## Formatting Options

### Indent

#### indentSize

* Specifies the number of spaces for each level of indentation.
* Value: Integer (e.g., 2, 4)
* Default: 4

    ```ballerina

>     function main() {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    public function main() {
```

Please make sure the examples are valid code.

>         if (condition) {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        if condition {
```

            io:println("Indented code");
        }
    }
    ```

#### continuationIndentSize

* Determines the indentation size for continuation lines.
* Value: Integer (e.g., 4, 8)
* Default: 8

    ```ballerina
    function longFunctionName(int param1, int param2, int param3,
            int param4, int param5) {
    }
    ```

### Wrapping

#### maxLineLength

* Maximum line length before code is wrapped.
* Value: Integer (e.g., 80, 120)
* Default: No line wrapping if `maxLineLength` not specified.

#### simpleBlocksInOneLine 

* Preserve single-line blocks in user code.
* Value: Boolean
* Default: `false`

    ```ballerina
    if x == 1 { return true; }
    while i < 5 { i += 1; }
    ```

#### simpleFunctionsInOneLine

* Preserve single-line methods on a single line.
* Value: Boolean
* Default: `false`

    ```ballerina
    function getName() returns string { return self.name; }
    ```

### Braces

#### classBraceStyle: 

* Placement of the opening brace of the class definition.
* Values: `NewLine`, `EndOfLine`
* Default: `EndOfLine`
    * `NewLine`

>         ```ballerina

Reviewer: Add new lines for better separation.

        class MyClass 
        {
            // class members
        }
        ```

    * `EndOfLine`
        ```ballerina
        class MyClass {
            // class members
        }
        ```

#### functionBraceStyle 

* Placement of the opening brace of the function definition.
* Values: `NewLine`, `EndOfLine`
* Default: `EndOfLine`
    * `NewLine`
        ```ballerina
        function foo()
        {

>             // function members

Reviewer: members -> body

or just omit
